my_collections/_lists/irishHistResearchList.md, before:

---
author: Rowan MacConville
title: Irish History Research Resource List
layout: page
---

*A master list of resources for researching Irish history that I hope to update regularly. Still under construction.*

---
# Biographies & Directories
- [portraidi](http://www.portraidi.ie) *A directory of Irish language writers currently working.*
- [Dictionary of Irish Biography](https://www.dib.ie/) *A free and open access dictionary of biography.*

# Bibliography
- [Bibliography of British and Irish History](https://www.history.ac.uk/publications/bibliography-british-and-irish-history) *Large and regularly maintained bibliography, not open access.*
- [Irish History Online](https://www.iho.ie) *A large and free bibliography of Irish history as of 2025 maintained by volunteers.*

# Digitised Primary Sources
- [Digital Repository Ireland](https://dri.ie/) *A digital repository with a wide range of accessable primary source collections related to Irish history.*
- [Divided Society](https://www.dividedsociety.org/) *A large collection of material related to the conflict in the north of Ireland.*
- [Europeana](https://www.europeana.eu/en) *A Europe wide archive of digitised materials with many items related to Ireland.*
- [Irish Newspaper Archive](https://www.irishnewsarchive.com) *A large archive of digitised newspapers, not open access.*
- [Irish Script on Screen](https://www.isos.dias.ie/) *A digital repository of Irish manuscripts.*
- [CELT Corpus of Electronic Texts](https://celt.ucc.ie/) *A large database of searchable texts from many periods in variety of languages, with translations for many. A great range of texts in easily workable formats*
- [National Archives: Census of Ireland](http://www.census.nationalarchives.ie/) *Digitised versions of the census of Ireland 1901/1911 and Census fragments and substitutes, 1821-51.*
- [oireachtas.ie](https://www.oireachtas.ie/) *The official site of the Oireachtas, has transcribed and searchable Dáil and Seanad records.*
- [Virtual Record Treasury of Ireland](https://virtualtreasury.ie/) *A digital reconstruction of the destroyed Public Record Office of Ireland with high quality digitisations of material held elsewhere.*
- [Irish Left Archive](https://www.leftarchive.ie/) *Digitised archive of materials related to the modern Irish left from the 20th century to the present day.*
- [Historical Irish Corpus](http://corpas.ria.ie/) *A searchable corpus of Irish language material from 1600 - 1926 produced by the Royal Irish Academy*

# Archives
- [Irish Architectural Archive](https://irisharchitecturalarchive.ie) *Material relating to architecture, some digitised.*
- [National Archives of Ireland](https://nationalarchives.ie/) *A large and wide ranging archive with many government records, has digitised census records.*
- [National Library of Ireland](https://www.nli.ie/) *A legal deposit library with a vast array of archival material and access to secondary sources both online and in physical copies, free membership.*
- [The Irish Traditional Music Archive (ITMA)](https://www.itma.ie/) *An archive with many online resources, recordings and interviews.*
- [The Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI)](https://www.nidirect.gov.uk/campaigns/public-record-office-northern-ireland-proni)

# Research Tools
- [Irish Archives Resource](https://iar.ie/) *An online service to find and search archive records from across Ireland.*
- [OAPEN](https://www.oapen.org/) *An online library of free open access academic books, many about Irish history.*

# General Websites of Interest
- [Archiseek](https://www.archiseek.com/) *Online catalogue of Irish Architecture.*
- [Century Ireland](https://www.rte.ie/centuryireland/) *Website produced by RTE for the decade of centenaries, with many articles and videos relating to the revolutionary period.*

# Podcasts & Radio
- [Three Castles Burning](https://threecastlesburning.libsyn.com/) *A podcast of Dublin history by Donal Fallon.*
- [The History Show](https://www.rte.ie/radio/radio1/the-history-show/) *A radio show on Irish history produced by RTE radio 1.*

Commit message:

Updated link lists with links from pocket

my_collections/_lists/irishHistResearchList.md, after:

---
author: Rowan MacConville
title: Irish History Research Resource List
layout: page
---

*A master list of resources for researching Irish history that I hope to update regularly. Still under construction.*

---
# Biographies & Directories
- [portraidi](http://www.portraidi.ie) *A directory of Irish language writers currently working.*
- [Dictionary of Irish Biography](https://www.dib.ie/) *A free and open access dictionary of biography.*

# Bibliography
- [Bibliography of British and Irish History](https://www.history.ac.uk/publications/bibliography-british-and-irish-history) *Large and regularly maintained bibliography, not open access.*
- [Irish History Online](https://www.iho.ie) *A large and free bibliography of Irish history as of 2025 maintained by volunteers.*

# Digitised Primary Sources
- [Digital Repository Ireland](https://dri.ie/) *A digital repository with a wide range of accessable primary source collections related to Irish history.*
- [Divided Society](https://www.dividedsociety.org/) *A large collection of material related to the conflict in the north of Ireland.*
- [Europeana](https://www.europeana.eu/en) *A Europe wide archive of digitised materials with many items related to Ireland.*
- [Irish Newspaper Archive](https://www.irishnewsarchive.com) *A large archive of digitised newspapers, not open access.*
- [Irish Script on Screen](https://www.isos.dias.ie/) *A digital repository of Irish manuscripts.*
- [CELT Corpus of Electronic Texts](https://celt.ucc.ie/) *A large database of searchable texts from many periods in variety of languages, with translations for many. A great range of texts in easily workable formats*
- [National Archives: Census of Ireland](http://www.census.nationalarchives.ie/) *Digitised versions of the census of Ireland 1901/1911 and Census fragments and substitutes, 1821-51.*
- [oireachtas.ie](https://www.oireachtas.ie/) *The official site of the Oireachtas, has transcribed and searchable Dáil and Seanad records.*
- [Virtual Record Treasury of Ireland](https://virtualtreasury.ie/) *A digital reconstruction of the destroyed Public Record Office of Ireland with high quality digitisations of material held elsewhere.*
- [Irish Left Archive](https://www.leftarchive.ie/) *Digitised archive of materials related to the modern Irish left from the 20th century to the present day.*
- [Historical Irish Corpus](http://corpas.ria.ie/) *A searchable corpus of Irish language material from 1600 - 1926 produced by the Royal Irish Academy*
- [dippam](https://www.dippam.ac.uk/) Acronym for Documenting Ireland: Parliament, People and Migration. A rich and well digitised online archive comprise three different projects; Enhanced British Parliamentary Papers on Ireland, Irish Emigration Database and Voices of Migration and Return.
- [Irish Republican Digital Archive](https://republicanarchive.com/) Archive of republican material, the vast majority of which from the latter half of the 20th century.

# Archives
- [Irish Archives Resource](https://iar.ie/) *An online service to find and search archive records from across Ireland.*
- [Archives Portal Europe](https://www.archivesportaleurope.net/) Searchable content from archives over Europe.
- [Consortium of European Research Libraries Resources](https://www.cerl.org/resources/main) Has various online listings and bibliographies related to European history.
- [Irish Architectural Archive](https://irisharchitecturalarchive.ie) *Material relating to architecture, some digitised.*
- [National Archives of Ireland](https://nationalarchives.ie/) *A large and wide ranging archive with many government records, has digitised census records.*
- [National Library of Ireland](https://www.nli.ie/) *A legal deposit library with a vast array of archival material and access to secondary sources both online and in physical copies, free membership.*
- [The Irish Traditional Music Archive (ITMA)](https://www.itma.ie/) *An archive with many online resources, recordings and interviews.*
- [The Public Record Office of Northern Ireland (PRONI)](https://www.nidirect.gov.uk/campaigns/public-record-office-northern-ireland-proni)

# General Research Tools
- [OAPEN](https://www.oapen.org/) *An online library of free open access academic books, many about Irish history.*
- [Directory of Open Access Books](https://www.doabooks.org/) A large directory of open access books. Most not related to Irish History.
- [The Online Books Page](https://onlinebooks.library.upenn.edu/) Maintained by the University of Pennsylvania, a large catalogue of books freely available online.
- [The Programming Historian](https://programminghistorian.org/) A great resource with loads of easy to follow guides for digital humanities projects and techniques.
- [Doing History with Zotero and Obsidian](https://publish.obsidian.md/history-notes/01+Notetaking+for+Historians) A detailed guide to a useful workflow for history research.

# General Websites of Interest
- [Archiseek](https://www.archiseek.com/) *Online catalogue of Irish Architecture.*
- [Century Ireland](https://www.rte.ie/centuryireland/) *Website produced by RTE for the decade of centenaries, with many articles and videos relating to the revolutionary period.*

# Podcasts & Radio
- [Three Castles Burning](https://threecastlesburning.libsyn.com/) *A podcast of Dublin history by Donal Fallon.*
- [The History Show](https://www.rte.ie/radio/radio1/the-history-show/) *A radio show on Irish history produced by RTE radio 1.*

{% include shareSection.html %}
